=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Time::Moment - Represents a date and time of day with an offset from UTC

=head1 SYNOPSIS
    
    $tm = Time::Moment->now;
    $tm = Time::Moment->now_utc;
    $tm = Time::Moment->from_epoch($seconds [, $nanosecond ]);
    $tm = Time::Moment->from_object($object);
    $tm = Time::Moment->from_string($string);
    
    $year         = $tm->year;                          # [1, 9999]
    $quarter      = $tm->quarter;                       # [1, 4]
    $month        = $tm->month;                         # [1, 12]
    $week         = $tm->week;                          # [1, 53]
    
    $day          = $tm->day_of_year;                   # [1, 366]
    $day          = $tm->day_of_quarter;                # [1, 92]
    $day          = $tm->day_of_month;                  # [1, 31]
    $day          = $tm->day_of_week;                   # [1=Monday, 7=Sunday]
    
    $hour         = $tm->hour;                          # [0, 23]
    $minute       = $tm->minute;                        # [0, 59]
    $second       = $tm->second;                        # [0, 59]
    $millisecond  = $tm->millisecond;                   # [0, 999]
    $microsecond  = $tm->microsecond;                   # [0, 999_999]
    $nanosecond   = $tm->nanosecond;                    # [0, 999_999_999]
    
    $epoch        = $tm->epoch;
    $offset       = $tm->offset;                        # [-1080, 1080]
    
    $tm2          = $tm1->with_offset($offset);
    $tm2          = $tm1->with_nanosecond($nanosecond);
    
    $boolean      = $tm1->is_before($tm2);
    $boolean      = $tm1->is_after($tm2);
    $boolean      = $tm1->is_equal($tm2);
    
    $integer      = $tm1->compare($tm2);
    
    $string       = $tm->to_string;
    $string       = $tm->strftime($format);
    
    @values       = $tm->utc_rd_values;
    $seconds      = $tm->utc_rd_as_seconds;
    @values       = $tm->local_rd_values;
    $seconds      = $tm->local_rd_as_seconds;
    
    $integer      = $tm1 <=> $tm2;
    
    $boolean      = $tm1 == $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 != $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 <  $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 >  $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 <= $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 >= $tm2;
    
    $string       = "$tm";

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<IMPORTANT:> This is an early preview release available for testing and 
feedback. The API is still subject to change.

C<Time::Moment> is an immutable object representing a date and time of day 
with an offset from UTC in the ISO 8601 calendar system.

Time is measured in nanoseconds since C<1970-01-01Z>. In C<Time:Moment> leap 
seconds are ignored. It is assumed that there are exactly C<86,400,000,000> 
nanoseconds per day. C<Time::Moment> can represent all epoch integers from 
C<-62,135,596,800> to C<2,534,02,300,799>; this range suffices to measure 
times to nanosecond precision for any instant that is within 
C<0001-01-01T00:00:00Z> to C<9999-12-31T23:59:59Z>.

=head1 CONSTRUCTORS

=head2 now

    $tm = Time::Moment->now;

Constructs an instance of C<Time::Moment> that is set to the current date 
and time from the system clock in the system time zone, with the offset 
set to the system's time zone offset from UTC.

=head2 now_utc

    $tm = Time::Moment->now_utc;

Constructs an instance of C<Time::Moment> that is set to the current date 
and time from the system clock in the UTC time zone.

=head2 from_epoch

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_epoch($seconds);
    $tm = Time::Moment->from_epoch($seconds, $nanosecond);

Constructs an instance of C<Time::Moment> from the given I<seconds> from the 
epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z. The optional parameter I<nanosecond> specifies
the nanosecond of the second [0, 999_999_999]. 

Fractional seconds is supported if the constructor is invoked with I<seconds> 
only:

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_epoch(0.123456); # 1970-01-01T00:00:00.123456Z

=head2 from_object

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_object($object);

Constructs an instance of C<Time::Moment> from the given I<object>. If the 
given object is an instance of C<Time::Moment> it's returned otherwise an 
attempt is made to coerce the given object to an instance of C<Time::Moment>.

C<Time::Moment> implements coercion handlers for the following object types:

=over 4

=item L<DateTime>

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_object( DateTime->now );

The given C<DateTime> object must be within the supported date range and must 
have a time zone or a time zone offset from UTC, coercing from the 'floating' 
time zone is not supported.

=item L<Time::Piece>

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_object( Time::Piece::localtime() );

The given C<Time::Piece> object must be within the supported date range.

=back

The coercion scheme is extensible and implemented as documented in 
L<Params::Coerce>:

    $tm = Params::Coerce::coerce('Time::Moment', Time::Piece::localtime());
    $tm = Params::Coerce::coerce('Time::Moment', DateTime->now);

C<Time::Moment> also implements a coercion handler from C<Time::Moment> to 
C<DateTime>:

    $dt = Params::Coerce::coerce('DateTime', Time::Moment->now);

=head2 from_string

    $tm = Time::Moment->from_string($string);

Constructs an instance of C<Time::Moment> from the given I<string>. The string 
must consist of a complete representation of a date and time of day followed 
by a zone designator. The second part of the time of day representation may 
have a decimal fraction.

The following are examples of complete representations of date and time of day 
representations:

    Basic format:               Example:
    YYYYMMDDThhmmssZ            20121224T121530Z
    YYYYMMDDThhmmss±hhmm        20121224T121530+0100
    YYYYMMDDThhmmss±hh          20121224T121530+01
    
    Extended format:            Example:
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ssZ        2012-12-24T12:15:30Z
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss±hh:mm   2012-12-24T12:15:30+01:00
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss±hh      2012-12-24T12:15:30+01

Where complete representations using calendar dates are shown, ordinal dates or 
week dates may be substituted.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 year

    $year = $tm->year;

Returns the year [1, 9999].

=head2 quarter

    $quarter = $tm->quarter;

Returns the quarter of the year [1, 4].

=head2 month

    $month = $tm->month;

Returns the month of the year [1, 12].

=head2 week

    $week = $tm->week;

Returns the week of the year [1, 53].

=head2 day_of_year

    $day = $tm->day_of_year;

Returns the day of the year [1, 366].

=head2 day_of_quarter

    $day = $tm->day_of_quarter;

Returns the day of the quarter [1, 92].

=head2 day_of_month
 
    $day = $tm->day_of_month;

Returns the day of the month [1, 31].

=head2 day_of_week
 
    $day = $tm->day_of_week;

Returns the day of the week [1=Monday, 7=Sunday].

=head2 hour

    $hour = $tm->hour;

Returns the hour of the day [0, 23].

=head2 minute

    $minute = $tm->minute;

Returns the minute of the hour [0, 59].

=head2 second

    $second = $tm->second;

Returns the second of the minute [0, 59].

=head2 millisecond

    $millisecond = $tm->millisecond;

Returns the millisecond of the second [0, 999].

=head2 microsecond

    $microsecond = $tm->microsecond;

Returns the microsecond of the second [0, 999_999].

=head2 nanosecond

    $nanosecond = $tm->nanosecond;

Returns the nanosecond of the second [0, 999_999_999].

=head2 epoch

    $epoch = $tm->epoch;

Returns the number of integral seconds from the epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z.

=head2 offset

    $offset = $tm->offset;

Returns the time zone offset from UTC in minutes [-1080, 1080].

=head2 with_offset

    $tm2 = $tm1->with_offset($offset);

Returns a copy of this instance with the given time zone I<offset> from UTC 
in minutes [-1080, 1080] altered. The resulting time is at the same instant.

=head2 with_nanosecond

    $tm2 = $tm1->with_nanosecond($nanosecond);

Returns a copy of this instance with the given I<nanosecond> [0, 999_999_999] 
altered.

=head2 is_before

    $boolean = $tm->is_before($other);

Returns a boolean indicating whether or not the instant of this time is before 
the other time.

=head2 is_after

    $boolean = $tm->is_after($other);

Returns a boolean indicating whether or not the instant of this time is after 
the other time.

=head2 is_equal

    $boolean = $tm->is_equal($other);

Returns a boolean indicating whether or not the instant of this time is equal 
the other time.

=head2 compare

    $integer = $tm->compare($other);

Returns an integer indicating whether the instant of this time is before, 
after or equal another time. Returns a value less than zero if this time is 
before the other; zero if this date is equal the other time; a value greater 
than zero if this time is after the other time.

=head2 to_string

    $string = $tm->to_string;
    $string = $tm->to_string($reduced);

Returns a string representation of the instance. If the optional boolean 
parameter I<reduced> is true a shorter representation is attempted.

The string will be in one of the following representations:

    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm                (only if $reduced = true)
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.fff
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.ffffff
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.fffffffff

Followed by a zone designator in one of the following representations:

    Z
    ±hh                             (only if $reduced = true)
    ±hh:mm

The shortest representation will be used where the omitted parts are implied 
to be zero.

=head2 strftime

    $string = $tm->strftime($format);

Formats time according to the conversion specifications in the given C<$format>
string. The format string consists of zero or more conversion specifications 
and ordinary characters. All ordinary characters are copied directly into the 
resulting string. A conversion specification consists of a percent sign C<%> 
and one other character.

The following conversion specifications are supported:

=over 4

=item C<%a>

Replaced by the C locale's abbreviated day of the week name. 
Example: Mon, Tue, ..., Sun.

=item C<%A>

Replaced by the C locale's full day of the week name.
Example: Monday, Tuesday, ..., Sunday.

=item C<%b>

Replaced by the C locale's abbreviated month name.
Example: Jan, Feb, ..., Dec.

=item C<%B>

Replaced by the C locale's full month name.
Example: January, February, ..., December.

=item C<%c>

Replaced by the C locale's date and time representation. 
Equivalent to C<"%a %b %e %H:%M:%S %Y">.

=item C<%C>

Replaced by the year divided by 100 and truncated to an integer, as a 
decimal number [00, 99].

=item C<%d>

Replaced by the day of the month as a decimal number [01, 31].

=item C<%D>

Equivalent to C<"%m/%d/%y">.

=item C<%e>

Replaced by the day of the month as a decimal number [1, 31]; 
a single digit is preceded by a space.

=item C<%f>

Replaced by the fractional second including the preceding decimal point or by 
an empty string if no fractional seconds are present. This conversion 
specification permits use of an optional maximum field width [0, 9] where the 
default field width of 0 will use the shortest representation.

Example:

C<%f> or C<%0f> is replaced by one of the following if fractional seconds are 
present (shortest representation):

    .fff        (millisecond)
    .ffffff     (microsecond)
    .fffffffff  (nanosecond)

C<%4f> is replaced by decimal point and exactly four fractional digits 
(zero-padded on the right or truncated if needed) if fractional seconds 
are present:

    .ffff

I<This conversion specification is an extension to the 
L<"IEEE Std 1003.1"|http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/strftime.html>>.

=item C<%F>

Equivalent to C<"%Y-%m-%d">.

=item C<%g>

Replaced by the last 2 digits of the year of the week as a decimal 
number [00, 99].

=item C<%G>

Replaced by the week-based year as a decimal number [0001, 9999].

=item C<%h>

Equivalent to C<%b>.

=item C<%H>

Replaced by the hour of day (24-hour clock) as a decimal number [00, 23].

=item C<%I>

Replaced by the hour of day (12-hour clock) as a decimal number [01, 12].

=item C<%j>

Replaced by the day of the year as a decimal number [001, 366].

=item C<%k>

Replaced by the hour of day (24-hour clock) as a decimal number [1, 23]; 
a single digit is preceded by a space.

I<This conversion specification is an extension to the 
L<"IEEE Std 1003.1"|http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/strftime.html>>.

=item C<%l>

Replaced by the hour of day (12-hour clock) as a decimal number [1, 12]; 
a single digit is preceded by a space.

I<This conversion specification is an extension to the 
L<"IEEE Std 1003.1"|http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/strftime.html>>.

=item C<%m>

Replaced by the month of the year as a decimal number [01, 12].

=item C<%M>

Replaced by the minute of hour as a decimal number [00, 59].

=item C<%n>

Replaced by a <newline> character.

=item C<%N>

Replaced by the fractional second as a decimal number. This conversion 
specification permits use of an optional maximum field width [0, 9] where 
the default field width of 0 will use the shortest representation.

Example: 

C<%N> or C<%0N> is replaced by one of the following (shortest representation):

    fff        (millisecond)
    ffffff     (microsecond)
    fffffffff  (nanosecond)

C<%N4> is replaced by exactly four fractional digits (zero-padded on the 
right or truncated if needed):

    ffff

I<This conversion specification is an extension to the 
L<"IEEE Std 1003.1"|http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/strftime.html>>.

=item C<%p>

Replaced by the C locale's meridian notation. Example: AM, PM.

=item C<%r>

Replaced by the C locale's time in a.m. and p.m. notation. Equivalent 
to C<"%I:%M:%S %p">.

=item C<%R>

Replaced by the time in 24-hour notation. Equivalent to C<"%H:%M">.

=item C<%s>

Replaced by the number of seconds from the epoch of 1970-01-01T00:00:00Z 
as a decimal number.

I<This conversion specification is an extension to the 
L<"IEEE Std 1003.1"|http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/strftime.html>>.

=item C<%S>

Replaced by the second of hour as a decimal number [00, 60].

=item C<%t>

Replaced by a <tab> character.

=item C<%T>

Replaced by the time of day. Equivalent to C<"%H:%M:%S">.

=item C<%u>

Replaced by the day of the week as a decimal number [1, 7], with 1 
representing Monday.

=item C<%U>

Replaced by the week number of the year as a decimal number [00, 53]. The 
first Sunday of January is the first day of week 1; days in the new year 
before this are in week 0.

=item C<%V>

Replaced by the week number of the year (Monday as the first day of the week) 
as a decimal number [01, 53]. If the week containing 1 January has four or 
more days in the new year, then it is considered week 1. Otherwise, it is the 
last week of the previous year, and the next week is week 1. Both January 4th 
and the first Thursday of January are always in week 1.

=item C<%W>

Replaced by the week number of the year as a decimal number [00, 53]. The 
first Monday of January is the first day of week 1; days in the new year 
before this are in week 0.

=item C<%x>

Replaced by the C locale's date representation. Equivalent to C<"%m/%d/%y">.

=item C<%X>

Replaced by the C locale's time representation. Equivalent to C<"%H:%M:%S">.

=item C<%y>

Replaced by the last two digits of the year as a decimal number [00, 99].

=item C<%Y>

Replaced by the year as a decimal number [0001, 9999].

=item C<%z>

Replaced by the offset from UTC in the ISO 8601 basic format (±hhmm).

=item C<%Z>

Replaced by the offset from UTC in the ISO 8601 extended format or by UTC 
designator (±hh:mm or Z).

=item C<%%>

Replaced by %.

=back

=head3 Example Formats

=head4 ISO 8601

B<Date>

Calendar date - 24 December 2013

    Basic format:               Example:
    %Y%m%d                      20121224
    %y%m                        201212      (reduced accuracy)

    Extended format:            Example:
    %Y-%m-%d                    2012-12-24
    %Y-%m                       2012-12     (reduced accuracy)

Ordinal date - 24 December 2013

    Basic format:               Example:
    %Y%j                        2013358
    
    Extended format:            Example:
    %Y-%j                       2013-358

Week date - Tuesday, 24 December 2013

    Basic format:               Example:
    %GW%V%u                     2013W522
    %GW%V                       2013W52     (reduced accuracy)

    Extended format:            Example:
    %G-W%V-%u                   2013-W52-2
    %G-W%V                      2013-W52    (reduced accuracy)

B<Time of day>

Local time - 30 minutes and 45 seconds past 15 hours

    Basic format:               Example:
    %H%M%S                      153045
    %H%M                        1530        (reduced accuracy)

    Extended format:            Example:
    %H:%M:%S                    15:30:45
    %H:%M                       15:30       (reduced accuracy)

Local time with decimal fractions - 30 minutes and 45 and a half second 
past 15 hours

    Basic format:               Example:
    %H%M%S%f                    153045.500
    %H%M%S.%1N                  153045.5

    Extended format:            Example:
    %H:%M:%S%f                  15:30:45.500
    %H:%M:%S.%1N                15:30:45.5

Local time and the difference from UTC - 30 minutes and 45 seconds past 
15 hours, one hour ahead of UTC

    Basic format:               Example:
    %H%M%S%z                    153045+0100

    Extended format:            Example:
    %H:%M:%S%Z                  15:30:45+01:00

B<Date and time of day>

Combinations of calendar date and local time and the difference from UTC

    Basic format:               Example:
    %Y%m%dT%H%M%S%z             20121224T153045+0100
    %Y%m%dT%H%M%z               20121224T1530+0100      (reduced accuracy)

    Extended format:            Example:
    %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S%Z         2012-12-24T15:30:45+01:00
    %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M%Z            2012-12-24T15:30+01:00  (reduced accuracy)

=head4 RFC 1123 

    Format:                     Example:
    %a, %d %b %Y %T %z          Mon, 24 Dec 2012 15:30:00 +0100

=head2 utc_rd_values

    ($rd, $sod, $nanosecond) = $tm->utc_rd_values;

Returns a list of three elements:

=over 4

=item C<$rd>

The number of days from the Rata Die epoch of 0001-01-01.

=item C<$sod>

The second of the day [0, 86_399].

=item C<$nanosecond>

The nano of the second [0, 999_999_999].

=back

=head2 utc_rd_as_seconds

    $seconds = $tm->utc_rd_as_seconds;

Returns the number of seconds from the Rata Die epoch of 0001-01-01T00:00:00Z.

=head2 local_rd_values

    ($rd, $sod, $nanosecond) = $tm->local_rd_values;

Returns a list of three elements:

=over 4

=item C<$rd>

The number of days from the Rata Die epoch of 0001-01-01.

=item C<$sod>

The second of the day [0, 86_399].

=item C<$nanosecond>

The nano of the second [0, 999_999_999].

=back

=head2 local_rd_as_seconds

    $seconds = $tm->local_rd_as_seconds;

Returns the number of seconds from the Rata Die epoch of 0001-01-01T00:00:00.

=head1 OVERLOADED OPERATORS

=head2 stringification

    $string = "$tm";

The C<$string> will be in one of the following representations:

    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.fff
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.ffffff
    YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm:ss.fffffffff

Followed by a zone designator in one of the following representations:

    Z
    ±hh:mm

The shortest representation will be used where the omitted parts are implied 
to be zero. This representation is conformant with ISO 8601 profiles, such as:

=over 4

=item * L<RFC 3339 Date and Time on the Internet: Timestamps|http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339>

=item * L<RFC 4287 The Atom Syndication Format|http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4287#section-3.3>

=item * L<W3C Date and Time Formats|http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime>

=item * L<HTML5|http://www.w3.org/TR/html5/infrastructure.html#global-dates-and-times>

=item * L<XML Schema|http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#dateTime>

=back

The C<to_string> method or the C<strftime> format string C<"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S%f%Z"> 
produces an equivalent string representation:

    "$tm" eq $tm->to_string;
    "$tm" eq $tm->strftime("%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S%f%Z");

The total length of the string representation will be between 20 and 35 
characters (inclusive).

=head2 comparison

    $integer      = $tm1 <=> $tm2;
    
    $boolean      = $tm1 == $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 != $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 <  $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 >  $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 <= $tm2;
    $boolean      = $tm1 >= $tm2;

=head1 SERIALIZATION

=head2 Storable

The serialized representation of a C<Time::Moment> is a string of 16 bytes that 
contains MAGIC (2 bytes), time zone offset from UTC (2 bytes), the number 
of days from Rata Die (4 bytes), second of the day (4 bytes) and nanosecond of 
the second (4 bytes).

The total size of the serialized C<Time::Moment> instance using C<nfreeze> is 
30 bytes.

=head2 JSON

C<Time::Moment> implements a C<TO_JSON> method that returns the L<stringified|/stringification>
representation of the instance.

=head2 CBOR

C<Time::Moment> implements a C<TO_CBOR> method that stores the L<stringified|/stringification>
representation of the instance as a I<standard date/time string> using tag C<0>.

See L<CBOR::XS>, L<RFC 7049 Section 2.4.1|http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7049#section-2.4.1>
and C<eg/cbor.pl> for an example how to roundtrip instances of C<Time::Moment>.

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

=over 4

=item B<(F)> Usage: %s

Method called with wrong number of arguments.

=item B<(F)> Parameter 'seconds' is out of supported range

Seconds since the epoch of 1970-01-01T:00:00:00Z (0) is out of the range:

    [ -62135596800 (0001-01-01T00:00:00Z),
      253402300799 (9999-12-31T23:59:59Z) ]

=item B<(F)> Parameter 'nanosecond' is out of the range [0, 999_999_999]

=item B<(F)> Parameter 'offset' is out of the range [-1080, 1080]

=item B<(F)> Cannot coerce object of type %s to Time::Moment

=item B<(F)> Cannot parse the given string

=item B<(F)> A %s object can only be compared to another %s object ('%s', '%s')

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

=head1 SUPPORT

=head2 Bugs / Feature Requests

Please report any bugs or feature requests through the issue tracker
at L<https://github.com/chansen/p5-time-moment/issues>.
You will be notified automatically of any progress on your issue.

=head2 SOURCE CODE

This is open source software. The code repository is available for public 
review and contribution under the terms of the license.

L<https://github.com/chansen/p5-time-moment>

    git clone https://github.com/chansen/p5-time-moment

=head1 AUTHOR

Christian Hansen C<chansen@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2013 by Christian Hansen.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

